Feature/2935  custom user properties (#4044)
tracim/tracim: backend/doc/user_custom_properties.md

# User Custom Properties

User custom properties allow adding instance-specific properties
for the users of the instance.

> The structure of those user properties should be defined in a json schema file. Specification available [here]('https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7'))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure of those user properties should be defined in a json schema file. Specification available [here]('https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7')).
```

It is possible to fine-tune the display and edition behavior of those properties by

> the Tracim frontend in a separate file (named UI schema). Its syntax can be found [here](https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-reference/uiSchema/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Tracim frontend in a separate file (named UI schema). Its syntax can be found [here](https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-reference/uiSchema/).
```

We do support also some Tracim specific parameters to have some Tracim specifics behaviors in both schema.

User-visible parts of these properties (title/description/…) can be translated by providing translations files (see Translations section),
these translations will allow the backend to automatically translate both the UI Schema and JSONSchema according
to connected user lang.

:warning: Tracim does not handle changes in the properties schema when custom property values are already existing in the database.
If you want to change the schema in an incompatible way with the existing property values you'll have to update the `user_custom_properties` table manually.

## Configuration

You can set a schema for all users of the instance in the settings (`development.ini`):

Simple example:
```ini
user_custom_properties_dir = %(here)s/examples/user_custom_properties/organization
user.custom_properties.json_schema_file_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/schema.json
user.custom_properties.ui_schema_file_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/ui.json
user.custom_properties.translations_dir_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/locale
```

> see [examples files related](../examples/user_custom_properties)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [examples files related](../examples/user_custom_properties).
```

### JSONSchema

Configurable through:
```ini
user.custom_properties.json_schema_file_path
```

#### Tracim specific properties in json schemas

No specific properties for now in json schema.

## UISchema

Configurable through:
```ini
user.custom_properties.ui_schema_file_path
```

### Tracim specific properties in ui schemas

No specific properties for now in ui schema.

## Translations

The json and ui schema returned in the HTTP API are directly translated.
The following json schema field values are translated:
- `description`
- `title`
- `EnumNames` (not standard JSONSchema but supported, see [here]('https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage/single/#custom-labels-for-enum-fields'))

The following ui schema field values are translated:
- `description`
- `title`
- `placeholder`
- `help`

> - all the `ui:<key>` variants of the previous fields
> for UISchema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- all the `ui:<key>` variants of the previous fields for UISchema.
```

Custom properties translation files are stored in `user.custom_properties.translations_dir_path` if provided.
They should be `json` format with a name of format `<lang>.json` (lang should be ISO 639-1 code).
The content of the translations should be `{"original value": "translation value"}` key:value style, which
make them compatible with [i18next-json-v3]('https://www.i18next.com/misc/json-format#i-18-next-json-v3').

To generate translation for an existing schema, a tool is available, which does a part of the job:
```shell
 $ tracimcli dev custom-properties extract-translation-source
{'Address': '',
 'Administrator': '',
 'Biography': '',
 'Birthday date': '',
 'Designer': '',
 'Developer': '',
 'First name': '',
 'Give use some informations about you.': '',
 'Last name': '',
 'Manager': '',
 'Organization': '',
 'Phone number': '',
 'System Administrator': '',
 'User Info': '',
 'address of the user': '',
 'info about a user in this organization': '',

>  'name': '',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> # User Custom Properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# User Custom Properties

```

> User custom properties is a feature allowing to add instance-specific properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User custom properties is a feature allowing to add instance specific properties
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
User custom properties allow adding instance-specific properties
```

> for all user in the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for all users in the instance.
```

> Idea is that for each user is associated some properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Idea is: for each user are associated some properties
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Idea  is: properties are associated to each user
```

Reviewer 4: `The structure of those user properties should be defined in a json schema file.
It is possible to fine-tune the display and edition behavior of those properties by the Tracim frontend in a separate file (named UI schema). Its syntax can be found [here](https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-reference/uiSchema/)`

Reviewer 2: I made a suggestion based on @grignards proposal.

which structure is defined by a JSONSchema draftv7 (specification available [here]('https://json-schema.org/specification-links.html#draft-7'))

> Another specific schema, more related to the way things should be display is available too. it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another specific schema, more related to the way things should be display is available too. It's
```

named UISchema and base specification are available [here]('https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api-reference/uiSchema/').

> We do support also some tracim specific properties to have some tracim specifics behaviors in both schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do support also some Tracim specific properties to have some Tracim specifics behaviors in both schema.
```

> We provide you also a way to translate theses schema.

Reviewer: `theses schema` I not know if its good.

Reviewer 3: Indeed. These is always these. Invariable. There is never any extra 's'.

```suggestion
We provide you also a way to translate these schemas.
```

> We provide you also a way to translate theses schema.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
User-visible parts of these properties (title/description/…) can be translated ...
```
We are missing a description of the translation process of the user properties here.

Reviewer 2: is need documentation ok ?

> :warning: migration of this schema is not handled by tracim, if you want to update the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:warning: migration of this schema is not handled by Tracim, if you want to update the
```

> :warning: migration of this schema is not handled by tracim, if you want to update the
> schema, you must adapt the sql table `user_custom_properties` accordingly to new schema.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:warning: Tracim does not handle changes in the properties schema when custom property values are already existing in the database.
If you want to change the schema in an incompatible way with the existing property values you'll have to update the `user_custom_properties` table manually.
```

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration

```

> you can set a specific schema for all user of one instance by settings(`development.ini`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set a specific schema for all users in instance by settings (`development.ini`):
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can set a schema for all users of the instance in the settings (`development.ini`):
```

Simple example:
```ini
user_custom_properties_dir = %(here)s/examples/user_custom_properties/organization
user.custom_properties.json_schema_file_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/schema.json
user.custom_properties.ui_schema_file_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/ui.json
user.custom_properties.translations_dir_path = %(user_custom_properties_dir)s/locale
```
see [examples files related](../examples/user_custom_properties)

### JSONSchema

> configurable through:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configurable through:
```

```ini
user.custom_properties.json_schema_file_path
```

#### Tracim specific properties in json schemas

No specific properties for now in json schema.

## UISchema

> configurable through:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configurable through:
```

```ini
user.custom_properties.ui_schema_file_path
```

### Tracim specific properties in ui schemas

No specific properties for now in ui schema.

## Translations

Translation of custom properties is done by api itself, which will directly return
translated schema for both UISchema and JSONSchema. Only some key parameters value are translated.
These keys parameters are:
- `description`
- `title`
- `EnumNames` (not standard JSONSchema but supported, see [here]('https://react-jsonschema-form.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage/single/#custom-labels-for-enum-fields'))

> for JSONSchema

Reviewer: Is it a title ?

Reviewer 2: not really its the end of the text.

Theses keys parameters are:
- `description`
- `title`
- `placeholder`
- `help`
- all `ui:<key>` variants of precedent keys
for UISchema.

> custom properties translation files are stored in `user.custom_properties.translations_dir_path` if provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom properties translation files are stored in `user.custom_properties.translations_dir_path` if provided.
```

They should be `json` format with a name of format `<lang>.json` (lang should be ISO 639-1 code).
The content of the translations should be `{"original value": "translation value"}` key:value style, which
make them compatible with [i18next-json-v3]('https://www.i18next.com/misc/json-format#i-18-next-json-v3').

> to generate translation for an existing schema, a tool is available, which does a part of the job:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate translation for an existing schema, a tool is available, which does a part of the job:
```
